---
layout: post
title: Euro Crisis Profile - from Athens to Berlin
published: true
type: post
status: publish
---

How does the work of a budget monitoring organisation,investigative journalists, academic researchers or think-tanks differ in the different countries of Europe? What are the key questions these organisations see to address - do they differ drastically, or are they largely the same?

A few months back, we wrote about how we would be working with and talking to Civil Society Organisations from around the world to ask them: 

* How government financial information relates to their mission, what questions are they trying to answer? 
* What are the high-value datasets? Besides the eight key budget documents that every government should produce, as highlighted by the International Budget Partnership, which datasets should we be asking that governments of every country in the world to release?
* How do CSOs get hold of the data? Formats, channels & procedures. 
* How do they ensure the sustainability of their efforts? What happens if the person who has been working with the data leaves? Do they document their processes? 
* What tools are used to work with, archive, share and to spread the word about any findings?
* Anywhere else the conversation logically takes us... 

Considering Europe's current financial situation and the Euro crisis, my route is a cross-section of Europe, from Greece to Germany, which stand at either end of the debate on proposed austerity measures for the Euro Zone. 

So, armed with a video camera, sunscreen and an Interrail ticket, I am departing today to find some of the answers to these questions and will visit Greece, Romania, Hungary, Slovakia and (possibly) Czech Republic collecting opinions on what it is like to be working with government financial data across Europe... 

This chain will be completed in the autumn in Germany, to whom most of Europe is currently looking for hopes of salvation of the common currency. 

## First Stop - Athens 

The first thing that I should note about my journey to Greece is that, unlike the other countries I intend to visit. I have been, as yet, unable to find a Civil Society Organisation which specifically dedicates its effort to monitoring government budgets, contracts and procurement. Any hints welcomed. 

Instead, I will meet the team behind **Diavgeia** - the Government "Clarity" programme, Thodoris Papodopulos a member of the OpenSpending community and graduate of the **school of public administration**, finally I will meet the team of **Transparency International** before moving on to Thessaloniki. 

