---
layout: post
title: An introduction to the TaxMan
type: post
published: false
---

One of the pieces of technology powering [Where Does My Money Go][wdmmg] is a standalone application, TaxMan, that performs an important but rather dull task. As anyone who has filled out a tax return will be aware, tax can be rather complicated, with numerous steps and calculations to perform. If you are  lucky, some of these calculations may be performed for you by your national revenue agency, but this doesn't help you if your aim is not just to calculate *your* tax, but to understand how tax is calculated in general. With [Where Does My Money Go][wdmmg], we needed to a way to calculate (or estimate) the total tax payments of UK citizens based on their salaries, including their "indirect" payments, of VAT (sales tax), fuel duties, etc.

[wdmmg]: http://wheredoesmymoneygo.org/

Enter the TaxMan. TaxMan is a really simple JSON-over-HTTP API that aims to provide current and historical tax calculators for jurisdictions around the world. While it currently has support for British and South African tax codes, including estimated calculations for British indirect taxes, it's easy to extend, and, critically, it doesn't try to shoehorn a complicated algorithmic tax code into a tabular format.

Before we go into details about how TaxMan works, let's see what it does. For example, find out which jurisdictions are supported by TaxMan (the following examples use [HTTPie][httpie] on the command line, but you can use any thing capable of making HTTP GET requests, such as your browser or jQuery):

    $ http GET taxman.openspending.org
    HTTP/1.1 200 OK
    Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8
    Content-Length: 75
    Date: Wed, 01 Aug 2012 07:42:31 GMT

    {
        "jurisdictions": {
            "gb": "/gb",
            "za": "/za"
        },
        "message": "Welcome to the TaxMan"
    }

We explicitly link to the jurisdictions from the root of the API so that any client libraries can refer to `jurisdictions.gb` rather than having to "hard code" any of TaxMan's URL structure. So let's follow the link for South Africa, here shown as `za` (TaxMan by convention uses [ISO3166 codes][iso3166] to denote countries):

[iso3166]: http://www.iso.org/iso/country_codes.htm

    $ http GET taxman.openspending.org/za
    HTTP/1.1 200 OK
    Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8
    Content-Length: 331
    Date: Wed, 01 Aug 2012 07:47:31 GMT

    {
        "calculation": {
            "total": 0
        },
        "data": {
            "income_tax": {
                "bands": [
                    {
                        "rate": 0.18,
                        "width": 160000
                    },
                    ...,
                    {
                        "rate": 0.38,
                        "width": 133000
                    },
                    {
                        "rate": 0.4
                    }
                ]
            },
            "rebates": {
                "aged_65_to_74": 6390,
                "aged_75_plus": 2130,
                "base": 11440
            }
        },
        "options": {
            "age": null,
            "income": null,
            "year": 2012
        }
    }

There's plenty to take in here, so let's focus on the basic structure first. There are three top-level keys in the response: `calculation`, `data`, and `options`. As you might expect, `calculation` contains the results of any tax calculations performed by TaxMan. Here, no calculation has been performed (we didn't give TaxMan an income with which to calculate), and thus there's no interesting data. But TaxMan will also attempt to provide the data *it used to perform its calculations*, and this lives in the `data` field. The `options` field makes explicit the available options for this calculator. Noting that we can supply an `income` and an `age`, some of the entries in `data` begin to make more sense. The `data.income_tax.bands` key contains a description of South Africa's tax bands. All bands have a tax `rate`, and all but the last band has a `width`, denoting the width of the band of income taxed at that rate. The last band covers all higher income, so has an effectively infinite width. For example, a tax system which charges 10% tax on all income up to £40,000, and 20% thereafter, would have two tax bands:

    [{ "rate": 0.1, "width": 40000 }, { "rate": 0.2 }]

So, what happens if we do supply an income? I'll truncate the `data` section of TaxMan's output for the sake of clarity.

    $ http GET 'taxman.openspending.org/za?income=200000'
    HTTP/1.1 200 OK
    Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8
    Content-Length: 468
    Date: Wed, 01 Aug 2012 08:06:07 GMT

    {
        "calculation": {
            "income_tax": {
                "bands": [
                    28800,
                    10000,
                    0,
                    0,
                    0,
                    0
                ],
                "total": 38800
            },
            "rebates": {
                "age_related": 0,
                "base": 11440,
                "total": 11440
            },
            "taxable": 200000,
            "total": 27360
        },
        "data": { ... },
        "options": {
            "age": null,
            "income": 200000,
            "year": 2012
        }
    }

You'll notice that the `calculation` section now contains much more information about the calculation, including data on how much you paid in each tax band, your tax rebates, and the total payable tax (`calculation.tax`).

And that's really all there is to TaxMan. It enforces few of the conventions mentioned above on its calculators, although I hope that the `calculation`, `data`, `options` triptych will become a pattern throughout. Most importantly of all, TaxMan is intended to be a simple, discoverable API. Explicitly representing available options is part of this aim of "discoverability".

Under the hood, TaxMan is a very simple open-source [Node][node] application, and calculators are typically one or two files. You can [find the source code on GitHub][tmgh], and we encourage you to fork it and add a calculator for another jurisdiction -- perhaps your own -- or improve an existing one.

[node]: http://nodejs.org/
[tmgh]: https://github.com/openspending/taxman/
