---
layout: post
title: Privacy breach identified in Cheshire West & Chester
published: true
type: post
status: publish
---

We were contacted today by a freelance data specialist who notified us that he had used OpenSpending to identify a number breaches in an individual dataset presented in OpenSpending (Cheshire West and Chester Council's £500 expenditure data.)

This was due to inconsistent redaction of sensitive data. The majority of these are payments to organisations, so not probably low sensitivity, however, there were a number of unredacted payee names for example, payments to individual foster carers and adoption allowance payments.

The person who had uploaded the data and noticed the transactions representing the breach had the following to say:

> "I immediately withdrew the dataset and removed all children’s services and adult social care data as a precaution before uploading it. I reported it to the council who in turn referred it to their audit committee. The council is still investigating the issue..."

Privacy breaches have not been a regular occurrence however, we take all reports on privacy breaches very seriously. As a precaution, we also immediately removed the UK Local Council £500 spending data, which also featured data from the council in question. The UK government produces a [guideline document for data publishers](http://data.gov.uk/blog/local-spending-data-guidance), which ensures that issues like this are prevented and hence very rare.

Everyday people from across the world make use of the more than 13 mil. transactions currently provided by OpenSpending. The information promotes transparency and helps citizens to hold governments accountable. In this instance, the universal search function quickly allowed the recipients to be identified once the pattern was recognised and has been used successfully many times in the past, for example to spot companies from which governments were purchasing surveillance equipment to spy on citizens. ([Read the blog post](http://openspending.org/blog/2012/02/24/how-spending-stories-fact-checks-big-brother-the-wiretappers-ball.html)).

We continue to support the effort of governments local or national to provide access to spending data.
